By Sybille de La Hamaide and Matthias Blamont | PARIS/HENIN-BEAUMONT, FRANCE
Centrist Emmanuel Macron took a big step toward the French presidency on Sunday
by winning the first round of voting and qualifying for a May 7 runoff
alongside far-right leader Marine Le Pen.

Though Macron, 39, is a comparative political novice who has never held elected
office, new opinion polls on Sunday had him easily winning the final clash
against the 48-year-old Le Pen.

Sunday's outcome is a huge defeat for the two center-right and center-left
groupings that have dominated French politics for 60 years, and also reduces
the prospect of an anti-establishment shock on the scale of Britain's vote last
June to quit the European Union and the election of Donald Trump as U.S.
president.

In a victory speech, Macron told supporters of his fledgling En Marche!
(Onwards!) movement: "In one year, we have changed the face of French
politics." He went on to say he would bring in new faces and talent to
transform a stale political system if elected.

Conceding defeat even before figures from the count came in, rival conservative
and Socialist candidates urged their supporters now to put their energies into
backing Macron and stopping any chance of a second-round victory by Le Pen,
whose anti-immigration and anti-Europe policies they said spelled disaster for
France.

A Harris survey taken on Sunday saw Macron winning the runoff by 64 percent to
36, and an Ipsos/Sopra Steria poll gave a similar result.

As investors breathed a collective sigh of relief at what the market regarded
as the best of several possible outcomes, the euro soared 2 percent to $1.09395
EUR= when markets opened in Asia before slipping back to around $1.0886.

It was the euro's highest level since Nov. 10, the day after the results of the
U.S. presidential election.

In a race that was too close to call up to the last minute, Macron, a pro-EU
ex-banker and former economy minister who founded his own party only a year
ago, had 23.9 percent of the votes against 21.4 percent for Le Pen, according
to figures from the Interior Ministry with 96 percent of votes counted.

Seconds after the first projections came through, Macron supporters at a Paris
conference center burst into the national anthem, the Marseillaise. Many were
under 25, reflecting some of the appeal of a man aiming to become France's
youngest head of state since Napoleon.

"PRESIDENT OF PATRIOTS"

With an eye to Le Pen's avowedly France-first policies, Macron told the crowd:
"I want to be the president of patriots in the face of a threat from
nationalists."

 leftright
 31/31leftright
 A combination picture shows portraits of the candidates who will run in the
 second round in the 2017 French presidential election, Emmanuel Macron (L),
 head of the political movement En Marche !, or Onwards !, and Marine Le Pen,
 French National Front (FN) political party leader. Pictures taken March 11,
 2017 (R) and February 21, 2017 (L). REUTERS/Christian Hartmann
 1/31leftright
 2/31leftright
 3/31leftright
 4/31leftright
 5/31leftright
 6/31leftright
 7/31leftright
 8/31leftright
 9/31leftright
 10/31leftright
 11/31leftright
 12/31leftright
 13/31leftright
 14/31leftright
 15/31leftright
 16/31leftright
 17/31leftright
 18/31leftright
 19/31leftright
 20/31leftright
 21/31leftright
 22/31leftright
 23/31leftright
 24/31leftright
 25/31leftright
 26/31leftright
 27/31leftright
 28/31leftright
 29/31leftright
 30/31leftright
 31/31leftright
 1/31
 If he wins, Macron's biggest challenges will lie ahead, as he first tries to
 secure a working parliamentary majority for his young party in June, and then
 seeks broad popular support for labor reforms that are sure to meet
 resistance.

 Addressing the battle ahead, he declared he would seek to break with a system
 that "has been incapable of responding to the problems of our country for more
 than 30 years".

 "From today I want to build a majority for a government and for a new
 transformation. It will be made up of new faces and new talent in which every
 man and woman can have a place," he said.

 Le Pen, who is herself bidding to make history as France's first female
 president, follows in the footsteps of her father, who founded the National
 Front and reached the second round of the presidential election in 2002.

 Jean-Marie Le Pen was ultimately crushed when voters from right and left
 rallied around the conservative Jacques Chirac in order to keep out a party
 whose far-right, anti-immigrant views they considered unpalatably xenophobic.

 His daughter has done much to soften her party's image, and found widespread
 support among young voters by pitching herself as an anti-establishment
 defender of French workers and French interests against global corporations
 and an economically constricting EU.

 "The great issue in this election is the rampant globalization that is putting
 our civilization at risk," she declared in her first word after results came
 through.

 She went on to launch an attack on the policies of Macron, whom she again
 described as "the money king" in a disparaging swipe at his investment banker
 background.

 His deregulation policies, she said, would lead to unjust international
 competition against France's business interests, mass immigration and free
 movement of terrorists.

 Nevertheless, with several defeated candidates calling on supporters to stop
 her, Le Pen she seems destined to suffer a similar fate to her father when she
 goes up against Macron in two weeks' time.

 Defeated Socialist candidate Benoit Hamon, Socialist Prime Minister Bernard
 Cazeneuve and defeated right-wing candidate Francois Fillon all urged voters
 to rally behind Macron in the second round.

 In Berlin, German Chancellor Angela Merkel's spokesman hailed Macron's
 success, tweeting: "Good that @EmmanuelMacron succeeded with his policy for a
 strong EU and social market economy. Wishing him all the best for the next two
 weeks."

 European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker expressed similar good
 wishes for the second round, his spokesman said in Brussels.

 RELATED COVERAGE

 VIDEOClashes in Paris as election results announced
 VIDEOVote counting begins in most of France in election first round
 VIDEOCandidates vote in French election
 Final French vote count puts Macron, Le Pen through to second round
 Triumph and tears mark night of French political theater
 BITTER DEFEAT

 It was a bitter night for Fillon, seen as a shoo-in for the Elysee until he
 was hit in January by allegations that his wife had been paid from the public
 purse for work she did not do.

 Fillon scored 19.9 percent in the first round and far-left contender Jean-Luc
 Melenchon 19.5 percent.

 "This defeat is mine and it is for me and me alone to bear it," Fillon, a
 63-year-old former conservative prime minister, told a news conference, adding
 that he would now vote for Macron.

 The two politicians left in the race offer radically contrasting economic
 visions for a country whose economy lags that of its neighbors and where a
 quarter of young people are unemployed.

 Macron's gradual deregulation measures are likely to be welcomed by global
 financial markets, as are cuts in state expenditure and the civil service. Le
 Pen wants to print money to finance expanded welfare payments and tax cuts,
 ditch the euro currency and possibly pull out of the EU.

 "Markets will be reassured that the dreaded Le Pen versus MÃ©lenchon run-off
 has been avoided," said Diego Iscaro, an economist from IHS Markit.

 "As a result, we expect some recovery in French bond prices, while the euro is
 also likely to benefit," he said. "However, a lot can happen in two weeks and
 French assets are likely under some pressure until the second round is out of
 the way."

 Timothy Ash, an economist at Bluebay asset management, said Trump's victory
 last November marked a turning point for electorates playing the protest card.

 "Despite all the hype about the rise of populism, 60 percent of voters went
 for mainstream candidates ... In an uncertain world, they rather go for what
     they know best and want to take fewer risks," he said.

     For a graphic on French presidential election, click here
